[Music]
we are looking at
slightly more
complex if loop
where
you have also else conditions as well as
alif condition
so here on the left hand side you have
got if then else
loop
and on the right hand side you have got
a loop that is fairly extensive so it is
like if
then alif and another alif and then else
and then fee so you have basically
one two three and four conditions the
fourth one is the negation of the
condition three
so the else is applicable for the
previous alif okay and therefore you
have got four different command sets
that can be operated on
so let us see this in action
and try how does that work so the
example script for the extensive
if alif loop is here
so what i am doing is that if the number
of arguments is greater than 2
then i am saying that the number of
arguments
given
is more than sufficient so i am actually
expecting 2. so if you have given more
than 2 i say you have got more than 2
arguments and if the number of arguments
is greater than 1
then we are saying the arguments given
are sufficient okay so which means that
it is processed after the first
condition so naturally it should be only
when there are two arguments okay and
then the third one is greater than zero
which means it should be one argument so
i am saying argument was given one was
given but it's not sufficient
and then if you see else it's applicable
to here which means it is equal to zero
so if the number of arguments is zero
then i am saying that arguments are
needed okay so this can be executed
by using
arguments so what i will do is i will
execute it
to display each of these options so
first i will execute it with
three options so i will say
a b c so there are three arguments
so it says that you have got more than
sufficient
then i give it with two arguments if it
says
arguments are given and sufficient
then i'll give one argument and it says
not sufficient and then i don't give any
argument it says arguments are needed so
you can see all the four
segments have been reproduced and what
we are looking at is just number of
arguments to go to each of the loops
that we are interested in so you can
actually place any other condition for
each of those if alif and
the further ellipse below it as you like
but remember that the
logic is going to be checked from the
top and therefore you have to always
analyze
what is actually being evaluated
in the second or third loops
carefully seeing
what actually has failed the first
condition
okay
so the if alif loop is quite rich in
bash scripts
and you can try that out
to test your conditions quite
extensively now you have learnt perhaps
in c or c plus plus language that if you
have many many
else if else if conditions then perhaps
you should be using
a case statement so in the case of c
language it would be a switch case
and
in bash also it's available so it's
called the case exact
statement which we have already seen in
the previous session
what i want to show you is that within
the options that are being matched
against the variable you could also have
a pipe to show different combinations
that are possible so in this example
that is on the screen
you are seeing that if the variable
is matching the
first option
then the first set of commands is
executed if it matches the second option
or third option then command sets two is
executed
if it matches either the fourth option
fifth option or sixth option then
command set three is executed
and if it does not fall into any of them
then by default the command set four
will be executed
okay so let us try this out using an
example
so the example script to test the case
is here
so what am i doing i am asking a
question what is your favorite image
processor
and then i am picking up the name of the
image processor from the prompt so i am
asking that from the user
and whatever was available then i am
going to compare with the options here
so either a capital g or small g can be
there in the first position so if you
are going to give the option jim
or inkscape then i am giving the output
as good choice
if i see any
string that starts with adobe either
with a small a or capital a i am going
to say that it costs a lot and needs a
cloud
and here if i
have an option like image j then i am
saying are you measuring things on the
image because it is very good for matrix
and for anything else i am
i'm saying that i don't know that such a
program could do image stuff okay so let
us just run this and see how it is
remember that the
case statement has
double semicolons to indicate the end of
each of these
options
and
issac is the way that the case is going
to
end okay so let us try this out
and i am going to give the first option
so i will give
jim and it says good choice i try it
again small jim it works
and i try it again and give
ink scape
and it's working for the first loop
and then i give
adobe acrobat okay and it gives the
second option there is a star here if
you notice there's a star here which
means that i can give an option that is
slightly longer than what i have listed
in the script
and if i give
image j then it is giving the fourth
option
now if i say image j
and then i give something else and you
see that
i don't match with this because there is
no
wild card there so it means that i have
to exactly match the string and if i did
not match then it will go and fall into
the default option in which i am stating
that i did not know
the name of the option
could do image stuff so that's what i am
saying here okay i did not know that
image j hyphen lkj sdf could do image
stuff okay so you see that the use of
star
the use of the bre
regular expressions is quite useful in
ensuring that the way you are expecting
the options to come could be captured as
accurately as possible
okay so let us look at
this case loop again once more so you
have got case
variable name in
after that the options
and then the commands and then double
semicolon and again an option
command and double semicolon default
star
command for the default options which is
fallback options and the double
semicolon which is optional the last
double semicolon is optional and the
exact to close the k slope
so this is something that is quite
useful as you would guess
the at least the early years of the
linux usage the programmers were all c
programmers because most of the system
commands were all c programs
and therefore people wanted also to have
some features
that are possible as extensions to the
posix standard
to be implemented in bash scripts
to mimic some of the loops that they
miss okay from c language so for loop is
one such beautiful construction of
language
where you could actually also have that
in
bash
remember that is an extension to the
posix and may not be available in some
of the older shells
okay so the way it is done is as follows
you have the three conditions exactly
the same way that it is working in a c
language except that there are no braces
to start and close the loop instead you
have a do and done to close the loop
okay and let us just try this script
there are two such loops that are
possible so you also have the
possibility of
multiple variables being initiated
multiple increment operations being
performed but you must have a single
finish condition
and you could see that this also is very
useful feature because it allows you to
have multiple variables vary in a
particular sequence for example in this
loop the a is actually increasing and b
is decreasing and then you are printing
them both side by side
the finish condition has to be
unambiguous and that's why there is only
one finish condition that is allowed
so you could have as many variables that
are actually
simultaneously changing as you would
like
let us see this in practice how does it
look like so the c for loop example the
first example is what i have shown you
on the slide itself
and let us just run that out and you see
that it is just simply displaying the
values of a and here i am actually using
only the power operator so a to the
power 2 okay a square is being printed
so from 1
until 10 okay until but not including
because here we are seeing less than
okay and each time a is automatically
incremented here in the same way as c
language is done and remember there is a
double parenthesis for the for loop
and here also there is a double
parenthesis because there is a
arithmetic operation being performed
inside
okay so this is a very simple and
beautiful loop that does exactly what
you would have expected in a c language
style loop
with the similar kind of a construction
so we can do
this with two variables so here what i
am doing is i am initializing two
variables
and incrementing one of them and
decrementing decrementing the other one
the finished condition is given by only
one of the two variables and what i am
doing is that i am squaring the first
one
and the second one and displaying them
side by side
so let us look at the output so as you
could expect we are going from 1 to 20
so from 1 to 20
okay but not including 20 so 1 to 19. so
1 to 19 you are having the square that
is displayed
but the b is actually going in the
reverse direction from 20 to
2 and it is also again
it is also being squared and displayed
ok so
this construction where you have got
multiple initializations and multiple
increments is also sometimes very useful
for certain operations
so let us modify this to see how does it
work
in case you are looking at the
variability
so let us
check if i can actually use the
different variable here so now because b
is actually starting
from 20 and coming upwards so i would
actually increase it
and the finish would then
should be
something a small number so i would put
as 1
and then let us go ahead and try this
out
and you see that the same output has
come so you can see that
you can
have the finish condition
for one of the two variables but it is
up to you which one you want to choose
now there are sometimes
requirements that the output of a loop
is stored in a file so that it can be
processed later
you can always
split the script in such a way that you
can run the script redirect the output
of the script to a file and then have
another script to look at that file to
do further processing so you can always
split the job
and do it in segments
but it is elegant if you can also do
some of it within the shell and
a very nice feature is available here so
you have the loop
that is written exactly like any other
loop but after the end of the loop if
you have a symbol to
mention the redirection of the output
and a file name is given then the output
of the loop alone is going to be put in
that particular file okay and here the
file name is given as a temporary file
with a dot followed by the process id so
that there is likely no confusion with
other files
and the output can then be stored in the
file name so let us just check
how does this look like so here is the
loop output
script and
i am doing something little bit more
here so i am
having the file name as large file dot
text
and i am checking whether such a file
exists so if it exists what i am doing
is that
i am refusing to go further mentioning
that it is existing file so i don't go
further i exit which means that i don't
want to over write the file and if such
a file doesn't exist then i can go on to
redirect my output onto that file and
that is what is being done in this loop
and what am i doing i am actually
outputting two values
i and i plus 1 okay and how many of them
10 of them
and do not forget to increment i because
otherwise you will be entering an
infinite loop because i is 1 and while i
is less than 10 the loop is running and
you know that unless you increment you
don't reach the end of the loop okay
don't forget that and i am writing two
numbers side by side and when it is done
then it is going to be written to the
file name and after that i am going to
state that the file has been written and
just check the size of the file okay so
let us
run this out
and you do not see the output of the
echo command of this position coming
onto the screen because it is only
redirected to the
file
okay so it has been written and you can
see that
the file has been written and let us
just check the
output of the large file and it has the
lines that we expected
now
if i run it a second time what would you
expect you see that because the file
name is already existing so the file the
script would not proceed further and
stop so this is a check that you can
actually have for yourself so that you
don't overwrite files
if you're not intending to do that so
what i would do now is i will remove
that file
and perhaps i will go ahead and edit it
so that the instead of 10 numbers
i would actually have let us say
10 000 numbers
and then i will run the loop
and i want to also find out how much
time it takes to run this loop so i will
put a time command in front of it
time followed by the script and then you
can see that it runs
and
for very small time i mean it runs less
than a second and you are able to see
almost 100 kilobytes of the data has
been generated and it has been put in
the large file wc minus l large file
will tell you that there are
basically 10000 lines
it has been done in jiffy so you can
actually produce numerical output to
prepare for some other processing or
some testing quite fast using these loop
conditions and writing the data to files
and i don't think one can write a file
with so much of data in such an elegant
fashion as what we have done till now so
look at the
script it is so elegant you are writing
the data
to a file
in just couple of lines
sometimes there are situations where you
would like to break out of a loop okay
so here is a situation where we have two
loops
and we would like to break out of the
inner loop
if we encounter a number uh here in this
case it is number five okay so we are
writing numbers from
0 to 10 and then we are
incrementing the i
and then checking whether it is equal to
5 and if it has reached 5 then we break
okay so it is just to test how to be how
do we break out of the loop
the test condition here is silly but you
can actually have any other test
condition
sometimes there are situations where you
are doing some file related activities
like creating a backup files or
something and you may want to have a
test condition to check how much free
space is available on the disk and if it
is
less than say five percent and you do
not want to go further and do any more
file
generation and you may want to come out
of the loop by a break okay so some such
possibilities are
there in real life so you want to come
out of a loop using break
and that is entirely possible so the
condition
with which the break is going to be
applied is here
and let us try that out with an example
so the example of the break condition is
here so we are going from 0 all the way
to 10
and when you equal to 5 then we output a
string saying five is badly we break so
what do you expect to see as an output
so you will go from zero to five and
then after that it doesn't go further
okay so the way to
use the break ease that you have a
condition to break so there's a if
followed by a condition
and then within the condition you may
want to
have an
message printed before you break which
is useful for debugging later on
sometimes when you are inside
a loop and you want to break not from
inner loop but actually from the outer
loop also so if you have a n number of
loops that are nested then you may
choose to break out of any of those n
loops so a break followed by an integer
will tell you
up to what
level you want to actually traverse
upwards and then break so if you say
break two it means that it is going to
break out of not this loop but one level
up that is this loop okay so you could
choose to have that
and here is a situation where what we
are doing is we are printing the numbers
and the j value is going horizontally
without a break so you can see printf
without a new line so that's going
horizontally
and whenever we finish the
j printing up to the value of i
then i is incremented
and then i is printed on the screen so
you see that it is like showing you a
triangle of numbers and we are seeing
that whenever the j reaches 7 then we
want to come out of that okay so that
means up to 6 the triangle is full but
the 7th row at the last digit of 7 to be
printed then we have a problem we want
to come out of that loop and we want to
stop executing completely after that
okay so that is what is being done with
the break
break 2
as a condition here so let us try that
out so here is the
loop that we have
seen
in the slide
and we are actually breaking out
and we also have a
echo command which i would like to
uncomment now
okay and then i will break out of that
okay
so
you see that
as soon as the 7 is displayed then you
are coming out of that
loop okay
and i can also come out of the first
loop
and you see that the display is a bit
different because when you come out of
the first loop
then the outer loop is still
when i come out of the inner loop the
outer loop is still available so it is
printing up to nine okay so you can see
that
the way you want to break out of loops
can be quite
different in different purposes so here
is a number that you should tell whether
you want to break out of this loop then
you have to say break one
this loop then break two
okay so i have put break one which means
i am coming out of this loop
there are situations in a loop where you
don't want to break
but you don't want to
process commands that are below a
particular level okay and you want to
continue with other iterations that is
you have a set of commands that are in
the loop
and you do not want to process some of
them if you have reached a particular
condition
and then want to do the next iteration
without any problem so which means that
you would like to actually continue the
loop by skipping the remaining commands
so you have the situation here the
continue is used what it says is that
whenever the j value is between
4 and five then you don't want to print
okay and you can see that here on the
output the four and five are not being
printed okay and for other j values this
part is not applicable so it goes on to
print those values so you have seen that
one two three is been printed six seven
eight nine ten also are being printed
so the continue is basically telling
that
do not process the commands that come
after it that means the printf dollar j
is not being processed under what
circumstances basically whenever j value
is
greater than 3 and less than 6 that is
whenever the j value is taking value of
4 and 5 do not execute the command that
follows the loop that is basically
printf dollar j so do not print j that's
what we are telling here okay i is
printed with a loop in the front and
therefore that is a separate number that
we are seeing here the j is what is
printed in a
horizontal line after the colon and
j values of 4 and 5 are being skipped
so you can come out of the
loop
skipping the commands below it but
continue with the iteration process by
using the continue
feature so here is the script that we
have seen just now and we execute that
to see that the output is what we have
seen on the slide we will actually now
modify that
and say that instead of
less than 6
i would make it as less than 7
and you see that the output is slightly
different it is now
between 3 and seven that are being
skipped
and otherwise remaining ones are being
printed so which means that only one
line is being
uh skipped
okay only this command is being skipped
okay other than that the loop is
actually proceeding to continue so the
continued command that way takes effect
only for what is below it there is
another keyword called shift
what this does is quite destructive
it would actually shift the arguments by
one
and then
reset the
positional variables like dollar one
dollar two etcetera the values are
reset so that you can actually refer to
the variables after after finishing up
the processing of some of the variables
so you can shift through the variables
and then process the arguments
but whatever has been shifted to the
left are all lost
exception is a dollar zero
and that refers to the name of the
script itself and that will not be
touched
here is one
example of the shift command so what we
are doing is that we are running through
the list of arguments so dollar one
means first argument we are putting in
quotes so that it is treated as a string
and then minus n we are asking whether
it is a it is a string with the non-zero
length
and if so then we go on to print the
argument number
and the value of that argument
okay and we are shifting okay and then
we are incrementing i which means that
we are printing one two three four
etcetera as i is incremented but each
time we are shifting the
arguments one after other so that we are
actually processing all the arguments
one after other okay and when we are
done with the loop there will be no
argument left because minus n
will fail when the r arguments are
processed and therefore the loop will
actually end
okay so let us try this out in a shell
and see how does it work so here is the
example of the
shift
keyword
and what we are doing is we are
initially reporting how many arguments
are there
after that
we are
printing the first argument
and then shifting so when i shift the
second argument will come to the first
position
and i want to note down that is the
second argument so the i variable is
incremented by 1 using the arithmetic
operation
and how long is this loop going to run
it is going to run until
there is no argument available that
means that if all the arguments are gone
then the dollar 1 would have null and
therefore the loop will stop
and after it is over then i want to also
print the number of arguments
and you should see that it should be
zero okay so let us try this out
so
first second third
fourth
and you can see that all the four
arguments have come so without using the
dollar two dollar three or dollar four i
am able to access the second third and
fourth arguments because of the shift
operator that is available but it is
only good in case you do not need those
arguments any further after the
processing because it is destructive in
nature after the arguments are shifted
to the left then they have gone out
this is also useful in processing
unknown number of arguments one after
other so let us look at that as an
example
so you can see that all the 26 arguments
have been processed one after other and
in the end i have got zero arguments
left
so warning
you can use the shift when you do not
need the arguments any further
because
after shifting to the left the arguments
are lost there is a command called exec
it has a lot of features with respect to
redirection of
input output
we are not looking at them now it is
also used to replace the shell with a
new program
and that is what we will actually see
and if the new program has been launched
successfully
then the control will not be given back
to the old shell because it has been
replaced but in case the new program has
not been launched
then the control will retain with the
shell then you can go on to do other
commands
so usually the exec command is used
to launch a different program which
would take further action
and the
initial shell that has been used to
launch it is no longer required
so situations like updating packages
and compiling and installing modules etc
that are done by apt
would use a feature something like this
because the shell in which such commands
are running are no longer needed once
the job is over
so let us try how does this command work
and for that i will use a an app called
extern
to try
how to launch an app
from the bash shell
example here i am showing the
process id of the shell and then i am
launching an x term
and then i am seeing whether the
external
would show me the
process id
which is same or different from the
parent passion so first of all let me
see what is the bash shell i am running
it is 2360. now i will execute this
script
so now i have got the
x term that is available
and when i am launching it you see that
the
program exec example was running with a
process id of 12073
and then it has launched the extern now
extern
would also have its own process id and
you see that it is one two one zero two
and i see whether this parent shell
shell12073 is available
and you see that it is showing as x term
okay and it says that it has been
launched by 2360 which is a bash so you
see that it is actually looking as if
from the bash i have directly launched
extern but actually what we have done is
from the bash we have launched the
script exec example
and then it is a script which has
launched the extern but however it shows
as if the parent shell for x term is 2 3
6 0 which means that it is the exact
example
process which actually got replaced by
external
so you see that we are back to the
parent cell with the pid 2360
and you could use the exec whenever you
do not need the original
script or shell
that is launching it
and it's a good idea to also have a
comment
to be displayed in case the launching
has not been successful
so that's what we are doing here in case
the extern was not available so it would
give a
message now i will intentionally change
the spelling
so that i don't have this successfully
running
so
which x term one so there's nothing
called like
x term one is not there so it should
fail
so you see that the failure has happened